# Formal Logic for Computer Dorks

What is logic, exactly? There's a lot of portrayals of logic in popular culture, from Spock to internet atheist debate bros, from evil computers caught in logical paradoxes to fleshy Cylons that want to get frisky with the traumatized survivors of a solar-system-wide nuclear holocaust they just perpetrated. If you were to go by any of these, you'd get the wrong impression. Sure, there is some truth to some tiny piece of it -- the origins of logic as a topic to study does sort of originate in Aristotle trying to debate bro people -- but on the whole, logic is quite different than that.

These lecture notes will try to give you a good sense of the origins and history of logic, in it's European context, and its formal manifestations. Partially this focus is due to lack of knowledge on my part into the dimensions of logic explored outside Europe, and outside the formal mode, and partially this is because this particular historical thread is the one that has the most direct connection to what computery folks today to (due, in no small part, to the legacy of European culture and imprialism). These notes don't cover the totality of logic nor could they, and doesn't contain all and only the good stuff, there's lots of great and interesting work from Indian logicians, feminist logicians, continental philosophers, and so forth. This is just what I can talk about.

So let's talk about origins and history.

## Origins and History

Where does logic as we think of it today originate and why did it originate that way? The short answer is Greece, and because Aristotle irritated with the Sophists. The longer answer is a little more interesting.

In the mid to late 1000s BCE, from about 600BCE to 400BCE, there was a growing interesting what we now call philosophy, typically of a metaphysical nature. It was a kind of proto-science, and early mathematics, and the people who did it are now known as Pre-Socratic philosophers because they came before Socrates. A little bit later, toward the end of this period, there was a shift in interest among people talking about philosophy, moving to political theory, moral philosophy, and so forth. The standard narrative here is that a bunch of pundits and thought leaders would engage in defense of various political groups and rulers in various ways. The majority of this was, supposedly, a bunch of bullshit, much like punditry today, full of bad arguments and post-hoc justification for the rulers being in power. These people were dubbed as "Sophists", from the Ancient Greek word sophos (σοφός) which means wisdom[^1], because they went around claiming to be wise and would offer their wisdom, often for a price. The kind of argumentation and punditry they engaged in was therefore called "sophistry".

[^1]: The word "philosophy" comes from "philosophia" (φιλοσοφία), which means love of wisdom, "philo" meaning love. The same word is used in things like "anglophile" (English-lover), as well as Philadelphia, which is Greek for brotherly love.

Within this context, Socrates started going around being crotchetty about people claiming to know all sorts of stuff. Know whats good, whats beautiful, whats moral, whats just, etc. and started inquiring into what people meant by all of this. His student Plato had some opinions of his own and wrote a lot of work putting his own ideas into the mouth of Socrates, rather than following much in Socrates' footsteps of not acting like he knew everything. Instead, Plato definitely thought he knew what justice and morality and so on were and that's why he argued that philosophers should be kings and people should abandon democracy.

Aristotle, who was Plato's student, started his work in this context, in the context of the Pre-Socratic natural philosophers, the Sophists, Socrates, and especially Plato. To some degree, he was tired with the Sophists, and probably lowkey annoyed with Plato, too, going around claiming all sorts of things and arguing over them, often convincing people with rhetorical flourishes and wordplay. So to deal with this Aristotle wanted to ask the question, what does it take for an argument to be a good argument? Argument here not as in two people arguing, though certainly there was lots of that and it was relevant. Rather, argument in the sense of a line of reasoning or a thought process meant to convince you of something. Aristotle wanted to know when you could or couldn't say "that argument is bullshit", and even what bullshit was in the context of arguments.

Aristotle wrote about a lot of stuff and was hugely influential, and then the Western Roman Empire collapsed and his work vanished from most of Europe. In the Eastern Roman Empire, it remained, but as that contracted, the work of Aristotle was picked up and expanded on by the nascent and growing Muslim world. The Medieval period in Europe had its own developments in logic -- Medieval Logic -- which is pretty much ignored in modern times and hardly anyone reads about it. The Reconquista in Spain opened up the vast stores of Ancient Greek literature that were in the libraries of Al Andalus, and then the printing press enabled cheap dictionaries of Ancient Greek to be mass produced, and the Renaissance and Enlightenment brought interest in Ancient Greek philosophy to the forefront again, in a kind of fetishization of the ancient world[^2].

[^2]: The term "Dark Ages" as applied to the Middle Ages/Medieval Period originates in Renaissance and Enlightenment thinkers trying to establish themselves as the Right And True Smart People(TM) unlike those stupid ignorant medieval people who they just so happened to have disagreed with and argued with a lot. Part of the rhetorical move that post-Medieval philosophy made was therefore to portray the Medival Period as "dark" i.e. without the light of wisdom, and the Renaissance and Enlightenment was the rebirth of wisdom, lighting the world with smartness. Part and parcel of this rhetoric was also an attempt to use the newly available works of the ancients, and Aristotle in particular, as the basis of their work, because after all, when Rome collapsed, didn't Europe decline and degenerate, and isn't it more reasonable to throw out all that corrupt Medieval nonsense and go back to the Good Philosophy of the glorious past?

This rebirth of ancient ideas brought renewed interest in logic and formal techniques, and eventually in th 1800s we get the work of George Boole, who sought to bring mathematical techniques to bear on logic and reasoning. In the time since Aristotle, mathematics had changed dramatically and become a much finer, more precise art, and so Boole was in some sense modernizing logic. From Boole forward, we got modern logic and there are too many major figures to discuss there that we'll leave that to the sections of these nots on their specific contributions. But, two people do still merit at least some mention.

The first of these two people is Gottlob Frege, who did a lot of work in the foundations of mathematics, in particular set theory, as well as in proof theory. Frege invented one of the earliest modern formal notations for logic, and to my knowledge the actual first notation for what we now call first-order logic (or really any logic with quantifiers), and a proof system that went along with it. It was weird, and we'll look at it a little bit later. His worth in set theory was also very interesting, because he tried to provide a purely logical foundation for arithmetic, reducing arithmetic to just logic. In his Foundations of Arithmetic (Grundlagen der Arithmetik in German), he proposed some basic laws of set theory. One of them, Basic Law V, turned out to be problematic, and Bertrand Russell was able to use it to prove that Frege's theory was self-contradictory. Russell then went on to work, with Alfred North Whitehead, to try to construct an alternative logical basis for mathematics, which gave us the Principia Mathematica, a massive tome that manages to prove 1+1=2 after only a few hundred pages of explanation and logic. The Principia Mathematica improved on Frege's weird notation, and gave us a lot of notation we now use today (though we've arguably improved it a little bit).

Another important parallel thread in the 1800s was of course Charles Babbage and Ada Lovelace, who designed and completely failed to build the worlds first steam punk sculpture masquerading as a computer. They were working in the context of trying to automate the production of books of logarithms and other such things for the British government. While this is not directly the study of logic, computation had always been lurking partially in logic, because the methods of reasoning that Aristotle introduced were very much algorithms, and his goal was, effectively, the algorithmization and mechanization of reasoning, which in the context of Babbage and Lovelace is just another kind of calculation and computation.

Computers and logic collided head on in the early 20th century, however, when people started to ask what things stated in a formal logic could be proved by purely mechanistic means. The Decision Problem (Entscheidungsproblem in German) was David Hilbert and Wilhelm Ackermann[^3]'s name for this, and they thought it was one of the most important questions of mathematics and philosophial logic, because for them it represented the limits of what mathematics could do. Answering the problem is partly why Alonzo Church invented the Lambda Calculus, and is why Alan Turing invented the Turing Machine. From the 30s on, we get a deeply complex intertwining of logic and computation.

[^3]: The same Ackermann who gave us the weird function you might have heard of.

## Logic

Having discussed the rough history of logic, I want to now talk about logic as we now think about it in the modern world, from a very high level perspective. Namely, I'd like to talk about the question we started with -- What is logic? -- in the modern setting.

One answer that one could give, which is very high level and which isn't terribly bad, is that logic, or rather Logic, is the field of study that deals with looking at what constitutes valid reasoning. Valid, here, is a term of art with a very specific meaning in the context of logic, but roughly, we say that a line of reasoning is valid if the ideas we're starting from allow us to conclude the conclusions we draw from them, in such a way that we can't ever be said to have gone wrong by making such conclusions. Sometimes people will phrase this as "an argument is valid if and only if whenever the premises are true, the conclusion is also true". This is a fine way of phrasing it but it presupposes a lot of stuff. I mean what's a premise? what's a conclusion? What is truth? These questions are also interesting ones, of course, and sometimes are included as part of Logic, or sometimes it's Philosophy of Logic, which is sort of separate but maybe not. YMMV. But in the context of *formal* logic, certainly the description above is a pretty good one.

But even then, it's quite broad and quite empty. So really, what we're going to discuss in these lecture notes, is specific manifestations of that question through different lenses. One major lens is the lens of proof, that is to say, the lens of formal objects and processes for performing reasoning, or communicating reasons, or whatnot. This is the subject studied within Proof Theory. This branch of Logic has many flavors. Another major lens is the lens of models, which are the subject studied in model theory. The idea of model theory is a little harder to convey, perhaps, but the gist of it is to ask what kinds of mathematical stuff corresponds to what syntactic/linguistic stuff, and how do the True Facts about the math relate to the patterns of reasoning that the syntax permits. The lines between Proof Theory and Model Theory are not clear, because of course they can be blended into one another in all sorts of fun ways, but that is the usual major bifurcation people give.

## logic

Now that we've discussed Logic, which grammatically is a proper noun -- a name, like Susan or France -- we can also talk about logic the common noun, as in propositional logic, first order logic, modal logic, etc. Logic, as a common noun, means a *particular* subfield of Logic, or a particular *formalism*, or a particular community of logicians and subjects of interest (as in the case of Feminist Logic).

In this case, we don't just think about one all encompassing logic, the one true system of reasoning that all of Logic ultimately must or ought to be done in. I mean, some people think that way, there are a lot of people who are very hot and bothered for first order predicate logic, for instance, and they will insist with near religious conviction that anything else is either some kind of syntactic sugar for their favorite logic of choice, or insist that anything else is actually just nonsense. But in this house we believe in logical pluralism, and so we're going to take the perspective that ***a*** logic, and the many logic***s***[^4], are tools to be used as desired for practical purposes and discarded when they don't provide any fun or useful insights.

[^4]: A similar, but much more rare, bit of wording shows up in post-modernist philosophy when discussing knowledge, and how different "knowledges" (note the plural) constitute equally acceptable ways of seeing and understanding the world, suited to different purposes.

A great deal of modern Logic, as a field of research, involves studying different logics and the ways that they can by used and applied to all sorts of interesting problems. Some fairly common examples are things like reasoning about what might be true and what must be true (modal logics), or phenomena that happen over time (temporal logics), or reasoning about what people know (epistemic logics) or believe (doxastic logics), or reasoning about probabilities (probabilistic logics). Some logics don't even look like logics because they just feel so much not like a logic, for instance multiplicative bilinear logic is better known as Categorial Grammar and is actually equivalent to context free grammars, which are more familiar to folks as tools for writing compilers. In another vein, games, whether they're video or not, are usually systems of well-defined rules that govern play, and are in a very real sense a kind of logic (though games have other functions beyond just the rules, such as fun, which is why studying games is called Ludics, not Logic). Each *specific* logic has its own specific tools for reasoning, and sometimes the choice of logic is made because the tools for reasoning are easier to use for the application at hand than using some other logic. Arguably the most interesting flourishing of logics happens at the intersection of logic and computation known as type theory, because in this setting the particular choice of logic leads directly to consequences for what kinds of programs you can write, and therefore the applications to real world problems have material consequences beyond just intellectual thrill.

## The Shape of Things To Come

So where are these lecture notes headed? The rough outline is as follows: the first thing we'll discuss is Boolean Logic and Logic Gates. This is sort of the middle of the story, given the history I mentioned above, but since these lecture notes are oriented specifically toward computer types, I figure it's good to start with the part of logic that you've probably heard of and seen and used a whole bunch already. We'll visit it briefly and then use that to springboard into the rest of the notes. After that we'll discuss Aristotle's logic as an introduction to the core ideas of formal reasoning, then revisit Boolean Logic through that lens, giving us Propositional Logic, which will allow us to more precisely frame the issues we're exploring. We'll discuss this logic in terms of proof theory, model theory, etc. as a means of introducing those ideas and their particular idioms and styles. We'll also do some implementation in software, to get to make it easier to grab ahold of the ideas and play with them. Blackboards are nice, but computers make it so you can't fool yourself into thinking you've explained more than you actually have. The computer either can do the thing or it can't, because you've either formalized the idea enough, or you haven't. Then, after a deep dive into Propositional Logic, we'll discuss different logics that have different purposes, capabilities, and styles, mostly by way of proof theory and programming, and sometimes a little bit of model theory.

So, let's get to it.